[draft] caching website page (#3908)
thanos-io/thanos: docs/caching.md

---
title: Caching
type: docs
menu: thanos
---

# Background

> Thanos can implement caching layers on multiple components. In general this should speed-up certain processes. There is no definitive guide on how one should setup an entire Thanos stack as each cluster and use-case is different. Especially what KPI's<sup>1</sup>, SLO's<sup>2</sup> and SLI's<sup>3</sup> matter to you, your customers and/or your stack should have influence on the setup.

Author: Yes, totally agree. I would like more input on this though as I lack the 100% correct knowledge on that subject.

However it is possible to give guidance on what each component tries to achieve, what it is used for and how you could configure this.

<sub>

> 1. service level agreement<br />

Author: I would love to remove the 'brs' but somehow markdown totally ruins the style for new lines by enters.

Reviewer: Weird :thinking: was about to comment about this

Author: It adds a 1.5 newline between the 2nd and 3rd line. Not sure how to fix it 🥺

> 1. service level agreement<br />
> 2. service level objective<br />
> 3. service level indicator

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- service level agreement
- service level objective
- service level indicator
```

| Caching type                                                                                           | Component           | Backends             | Configuration | Extra             |
| -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ------------------ | --------------------- | ----------------- | ----------------------- |
| Index cache | [Store gateway](components/store.md) | `in_memory` and `memcached` | base configuration | Enabled by default `in_memory`
| Bucket cache | [Store gateway](components/store.md) | `memcached` only | base configuration + specific bucket cache extra's | Has extra metadata and chunk configuration options
| Query frontend cache | [Query-frontend](components/query-frontend.md)  | `in_memory` and `memcached` | base configuration + extra field `expiration` | `max_item_size` is currently not supported

## Index cache

Thanos Store Gateway supports an index cache to speed up postings and series lookups from TSDB blocks indexes

## Bucket cache

Thanos Store Gateway supports a “caching bucket” with chunks and metadata caching to speed up loading of chunks from TSDB blocks.

## Query frontend cache

> Query Frontend supports caching query results and reuses them on subsequent queries. If the cached results are incomplete, Query Frontend calculates the required subqueries and executes them in parallel on downstream queriers. Query Frontend can optionally align queries with their step parameter to improve the cacheability of the query results.

Reviewer: Query frontend also caches label requests :P

Following options are used for metadata caching (meta.json files, deletion mark files, iteration result):

- `blocks_iter_ttl`: how long to cache result of iterating blocks.
- `metafile_exists_ttl`: how long to cache information about whether meta.json or deletion mark file exists.
- `metafile_doesnt_exist_ttl`: how long to cache information about whether meta.json or deletion mark file doesn't exist.
- `metafile_content_ttl`: how long to cache content of meta.json and deletion mark files.
- `metafile_max_size`: maximum size of cached meta.json and deletion mark file. Larger files are not cached.

A full example would be: 

```yaml
type: MEMCACHED # Case-insensitive
config:
  addresses: []
  timeout: 500ms
  max_idle_connections: 100
  max_async_concurrency: 20
  max_async_buffer_size: 10000
  max_item_size: 1MiB
  max_get_multi_concurrency: 100
  max_get_multi_batch_size: 0
  dns_provider_update_interval: 10s
chunk_subrange_size: 16000
max_chunks_get_range_requests: 3
chunk_object_attrs_ttl: 24h
chunk_subrange_ttl: 24h
blocks_iter_ttl: 5m
metafile_exists_ttl: 2h
metafile_doesnt_exist_ttl: 15m
metafile_content_ttl: 24h
metafile_max_size: 1MiB  
```

## Query frontend specific

> `expiration` specifies memcached cache valid time , If set to 0s, so using a default of 24 hours expiration time

Reviewer: `expiration` means how long the data is stored in Memcached i.e. after that time Memcached evicts those items. Yep, the default is `24h` :hugs: I think we can improve this sentence:
```suggestion
`expiration` specifies how long memcached itself keeps items. After that time, memcached evicts those items. `0s` means the default duration of `24h`.
```

Full example:

```yaml
type: MEMCACHED # Case-insensitive
config:
  addresses: []
  timeout: 500ms
  max_idle_connections: 100
  max_async_concurrency: 20
  max_async_buffer_size: 10000
  max_item_size: 1MiB
  max_get_multi_concurrency: 100
  max_get_multi_batch_size: 0
  dns_provider_update_interval: 10s
  expiration: 0s  
 ``` 

# Base configuration for in-memory

```yaml
type: IN-MEMORY
config:
  max_size: 0
  max_item_size: 0
```

## Index cache specific for in-memory

> The index cache has no exceptions on the base configuration

Reviewer: Full stop missing

## Bucket cache specific for in-memory

> `in-memory` bucket cache is not supported. This is only possible with `memcached` as backend.

Author: I'm somewhat confused, as the current docs live on the website state that it is supported here: https://thanos.io/tip/components/store.md/#caching-bucket 

Yet I also saw a place were it states that only memcached is supported.

Reviewer: Maybe we forgot to update something? https://github.com/thanos-io/thanos/pull/3579

## Query frontend specific for in-memory

> `validity` specifies cache valid time , If set to 0s, so using a default of 24 hours expiration time

Author: I'm actually not sure if this is correct, as I could not find information on this :D
